Downloaded from
YTS.MX
Animation has become.
Official YIFY movies site:
YTS.MX
in the minds of the consumers. a genre.
But it also is an art form.
and of all the art forms of animation.
to me. the most sacred and magical
is stop-motion
because it's the bond
between an animator and the puppet.
And normally. film captures reality.
Animation creates it
and has to simulate the capture.
You give life to it.
and that is the highest art form.
What's gonna make us unique is
bringing Guillermo's live-action aesthetic
to this movie.
There's a sophistication of filmmaking
that when it's applied to stop-motion.
which is inherently handcrafted.
you get a really powerful combination.
Pinocchio is a movie
that has a huge heart.
It deals with who you are.
staying true to yourself.
and not having to change to be accepted.
It also is about being a father
and being a son.
learning to love your family
for who they are and how they are.
Guillermo's Pinocchio is
completely surprising.
He's able to Trojan horse
these really big discussions
into a really entertaining family movie.
He is always looking at
what it is to be human
and what it is to join a society.
That's his territory.
and Pinocchio is all about that.
It's a retelling of a story
you think you do know.
but you don't know.
The outsider aspect
of Pinocchio
is what attracted me to the story.
I identify with outsider creatures
like the creature of Frankenstein
or Pinocchio
and having to figure out the world
on your own.
that the things that you are told
are not enough.
And you want to know why this is right
and why this is wrong
when this feels wrong
and this feels right.
To me. there is a fragility
to Pinocchio being otherworldly
and people being unable
to see him as a real boy
because he doesn't look like what people
think a real boy should look like.
I'm a real boy!
Demon!
Witchcraft!
The magic is
it's Guillermo's take on Pinocchio.
so the look of it is
such a Guillermo film.
He's brought
sort of the creature aspect into it
that you could only hope
Guillermo would bring into Pinocchio.
But there's a real heartfelt.
sort of emotional side
to the story as well.
Pinocchio!
Love hurts.
It took about 15 years
to do Pinocchio.
and we had to assemble
sort of the best team in stop-motion.
I call your attention to
the miniature buttons.
-Yeah.
-Damn. they're fine.
They are. aren't they?
We did a three-way link between
London. Portland. and Guadalajara.
I have been supporting Mexican animation
since the '80s.
and we wanted to have a link with Mexico.
I wanted Mexican animators
animating Pinocchio and the cricket.
Main characters because that demonstrates
the great artistry and technical capacity
that a Mexican studio can have
in animation.
We got some of the best animators
in the world.
all under the guidance of Shadowmachine.
We embarked on an amazing process
to build a stop-motion team
commensurate with the vision
that Guillermo had.
The depth of experience
on our project was really great.
It's just tremendously exciting because.
you know. we get to be
at the top of our game.
You know. we're always waiting for
a script that sort of rises
to something that you want to service.
and this is one of those experiences.
The thing that
immediately caught my attention
was that it didn't look like
any animated film
you've ever seen before.
Guillermo's aesthetic is woven through
almost every frame of this film.
There's a valuable difference between
stop-motion as an art form and digital.
We have seen a movement from
stop-motion in the early days
where you had the moiré
and the flicker of fur and fabric.
even the atmospheric dust on the sets.
and the imperfection of it was
so gorgeous to look at
because it told you how
the thing was done.
I really wanted this movie
to land in a way
that had the material nature of
a handmade piece of animation.
an artisanal. beautiful exercise
in carving. painting. sculpting.
but it had the sophistication of movement
that research on rigs and puppetry making
have taken us to.
So. you know. my role as
the puppet fabrication supervisor.
it's really getting
a director like Guillermo
to trust me with his image of his movie.
and then it's the practical element of
how do we turn these inanimate objects
into fully animatable puppets?
We have to plan out a lot of
how it's going to move.
what it needs to do
within the arc of its story.
You know. what is it going to
need to be rigged on.
and how much does it weigh?
That's even a thing we have to consider.
It's a tough balance.
especially when it comes to creatures.
which are certainly more cumbersome
than a human character.
You've got so many
fantastical. wonderful elements
that each and every one of them
is hard to do.
but you have to put it together
and make it work together.
It's a very long process
getting a puppet ready.
You know. it might take a year
to get to where
you've got a finished puppet
that everyone's happy with.
and it can actually go out on stage.
and then you can animate it.
Guillermo really wanted
this to be mechanical
rather than replacement.
We have both puppets in this movie.
Replacement is every mouth shape
and every expression
being a transplant.
So. its every mouth shape is
a separate face mask
that sits on the puppet's face.
Pinocchio is replacement
because he's a wooden boy.
So. we made him act like
he was made out of wood.
His face stays the same size at all times.
He doesn't have any puffy cheeks.
The wood grains in his face
doesn't move around at all.
It just opens up.
I sort of described it as using a chisel
to open the mouth up.
So. you just go it in one bang.
There's a bit of cushion on the back end.
Bang! Open.
I think that was a stroke of genius
when we all came up with that.
I was like. "Yes!"
Technically speaking. it was gonna
be a really difficult puppet to create.
We had to find new techniques
so that you could see the character
in all its wooden form
with its crude wooden joints.
We wanted it to be as practical
and as durable
as a feature film would demand of
a puppet of that size.
Pinocchio himself is the first puppet
fully printed out of a 3D printer.
But then Volpe and Geppetto
are all mechanical.
A mechanical animation is where
you have a silicone skin
sitting over what is essentially
a Swiss watch of mechanisms.
With that. the animator move
frame-by-frame
every element from the outside
through the skin.
It's been a long process
working with the animation team
to see how we would develop
the techniques used for each character.
You know. Geppetto works so well
because he's got a big mustache
and a big beard and heavy eyebrows.
And all of these things
lend themselves to mechanical faces.
So. when the animator started to work with
the first Carlo puppet.
it was such a struggle.
The more smooth the face.
the harder it is
to make those expressions change.
So. the animators started relying on
the lower eyelids.
on the brows. on the body language.
And especially with Carlo.
one of the things we wanted to do was
do unnecessary gestures in animation.
This was an ambassador to that
because nobody does
more unnecessary gestures than a child.
One of Guillermo's initial conceits was
really making sure that you hold on
to the realness
and the tactileness of stop-motion
and the idea that you animate mistakes.
He was really stressing
the realism of the performances
like little mistakes
that people make all the time.
If they go to pick up a dinner plate.
they maybe miss it
and go for it again.
In live-action.
you beg for a mistake.
you beg for a line reading
that is not what you expected.
This invoking of reality is
very hard in stop-motion
because you are animating it.
so you need to simulate those accidents.
Lift your leg.
Because he's a live-action director.
he understands the time it takes
for people to process
faces and things on screen.
On this film.
Guillermo really has taken the time to say
it needs to get slowed down.
We need to see Pinocchio
thinking about that.
I said. "If the character is thinking.
I wanna see the eyes
inputting the information."
"I want to see a subtle shift."
If you animate the ordinary.
you will achieve something extraordinary.
I co-directed with Mark Gustafson.
who. for me. is
a legendary director and animator.
It's been amazing
working with Guillermo because
he's an artist
who's at the top of his game right now.
So. it makes you have to
raise your game as well.
Guillermo's been fantastic in the way that
he completely trusted the animator.
a bit like he trusts his actors.
Basically. the way you do
a live-action is between action and cut.
the actor owns the shot.
And you make this bond with the animators.
and it gives them a lot of power
to think through the puppet.
to not do an action. to avoid pantomime.
and to give us real acting.
The animators are our actors.
Animation is such an elaborate process.
and we wanted animators
to own the performances.
One of the founding principles
that Guillermo and I came up with
when we started this was
give the performance back to the animators
as much as possible.
Part of that is them shooting these
what we call LAVs. live-action videos.
Do not tell lies
or your nose will grow and grow…
Most times before you do a shot
as an animator.
you would go and investigate
what kind of shape
this shot is gonna have.
what kind of motion. what kind of speed.
A good and quick way to do that
is just film yourself.
So. the animator would turn up with
a little video of themself
doing the action.
Guillermo really loved that.
Every time he sees them.
he's. like. a big smile and going. "Yeah!"
"Just like that! It's great!"
Spazzatura.
Gris Grimly designed
an amazing Pinocchio.
To me. the best Pinocchio I've seen
because it's so simple and so beautiful.
When I started
illustrating Pinocchio.
I just wanted him to be lanky and awkward
like a puppet without the strings.
Designing Pinocchio
was the main character
we wanted to get down first.
Guillermo had the wonderful idea of
it being almost Frankenstein-like
in that one half is finished
and one is unfinished.
We made him asymmetrical
because Geppetto carves him
when he's drunk.
And one of the ideas is
he starts with the ear and this hair.
and he's really careful with that.
and then he goes. "Ah."
And kind of finishes him quick.
-Mm.
Geppetto was the one character
that we designed the most.
We layered him out on clothing.
We made it a point to make
everything he was wearing ratty.
You know. he's not a guy
that can afford many pairs of pants.
My son.
We have to take him to a place
where he's not pleasant.
I mean. this guy drinks.
This guy gets angry.
This guy doesn't understand Pinocchio.
It takes him a while to realize that
his love for this boy is
much more important
than doing what is socially acceptable.
Even if he's dead. I could still book him.
How dare you. sir? Show some respect!
The main villain
in Collodi's stories.
a character called Mangiafuoco.
is a very large character.
and I had a bad feeling about it.
I didn't like it.
I thought it was very much a cliché.
Guillermo called whoever was working
on the show at that point.
and he looked at us.
and he said. "Hey. guys."
"I think our main villain is crap.
and I want to change it."
And I said. "I really think
this should be the guy."
"Can we make him the main antagonist?"
And that was just. "Okay. All right.
We've already built the villain."
-So. what do we do?
So. what was your answer to his question?
It was one of those moments where
once you see it. you can't unsee it.
and you work with the amazing team
to figure it out.
There was a lot of time
that was spent designing Mangiafuoco
with a huge beard. and this puppet.
we finished making him. and he's now
a background character for the circus.
Go away! This is not a spectacle.
But it is!
Volpe is one of the more
over-the-top characters.
He's really fun because
he's kind of the devil.
He's very transactional.
He's just what's best for him.
One last detail to take care of.
Whoa!
When we were thinking about the cricket
I was thinking of a cricket
that has traveled all over the world.
and lived with a sculptor and a barrister.
And I thought of the name
Sebastian J. Cricket.
That sounded so sophisticated.
Cricket was really driven
by Guillermo.
He takes this character
who is a little bit arrogant.
and he makes you really like him
and want to follow him.
The animation on the cricket is
very simple in appearance.
but that means
you have to be very judicious with that.
He uses the hands a lot
to explain. to…
You know. he's very righteous.
So. he uses the hands
to demand an explanation.
to accuse somebody.
to signal.
He's a character that uses
his whole body as a face.
I'm not a governess. madam.
And then. you know. it's a creature design
which is a completely different thing.
and that is Guillermo's true wheelhouse.
The dogfish. Death. the sprite.
the cricket. the rabbits
all have the same
unworldly blue violet skin
because they are all related.
The rabbits take the dead
to the other side.
And they're an extension of Death.
which is the sister of life.
which is the sprite.
The concept art was
never clean or stylized.
It wasn't a very polished looking like…
look to a character.
They would have dirt
under their fingernails.
They would have. you know. blemishes.
and it was like he wanted every character
to feel like it lived a life
before in the film.
You know.
we would create a character.
uh. make a beautiful costume.
you know. for Geppetto
or one of the other characters.
and you get a message back.
Guillermo's seen it.
It's gotta look dirty.
You see. you make a beautiful puppet.
but it looks like it's come straight out
of the shop when you finish it.
It doesn't look
like it's a character in a story.
You don't have to believe
they are real people.
You have to believe in them as characters.
and we wanted to embody the form
and the character into one.
We wanted to fuse them.
Volpe with his sort of demonic.
horn-like wings on the hair.
The innocence of Pinocchio.
his simplicity.
The sort of earthiness
and beautiful old-world grace in Geppetto.
We wanted to do a labor of design
that told the story.
Stridulations of My Youth
by Sebastian J. Cricket.
In terms of scale.
we use different size of puppets
for different needs.
This is our Pinocchio to interact with
the cricket. which is this height.
Sebastian J. Cricket.
And in order for him to be the right size
in very few shots.
we need the cricket
and the shoulder of Pinocchio
talking to him. whispering in his ear.
So. we use this big Pinocchio.
And then in certain shots.
we use this small Pinocchio.
Then we have this
small crickets
for other shots.
particularly when he gets crushed.
Oh!
The pain.
You can only build a puppet
so small
and still have good control over it
in terms of the animation.
So we built Pinocchio
as small as we could and still
have really good control over him.
And then everybody else's scale is
in relation to that.
And then the sets are in relation to that.
Everything has to be built.
That's sort of the blessing
and the curse of stop-motion.
You know. you can make things look
exactly as you need them to look.
I think that's exciting
because you fully create a world
and a world that's unlike any other
or very much like another.
And that's kind of really powerful.
It helps you best tell the story.
So we looked at a lot of Guillermo's films
and picked up key things.
Colors. textures.
shapes of windows.
and just general atmosphere.
You can probably tell within three seconds
that you're watching a Guillermo film.
and we wanted that to be true of this.
The sets are evocative
of the beauty
of these little Italian towns.
and I know places just like this.
We did a huge amount
of research.
Photographs and posters.
we copied typography
because I wanted the world to feel real.
All the structures in the town
have the remnants of their origins
like medieval ruins.
and then on top of that
you have 18th-century carvings.
and then you have murals
that were frescoes from the 1500s. 1400s.
So. it feels layered.
Once you're translating script
to storyboards.
those decisions can define
how massive the vision can be.
and you can make choices in story
where you put the camera.
how much the camera's moving.
One of the unique challenges
that we have is
the animator has to actually
be able to get in
and reach the puppets and animate.
So. we have to design these sets
so that they can be pulled apart
in many different ways.
It's all a big. like. teamwork.
and we're all sitting there together
talking about how this is gonna look.
The film looks a certain way.
and then the animation
needs to fit into that world as well.
Early on.
you have to find out the aesthetic.
like exactly what it is.
And we'll base it on
something very simple.
You know.
we have a pine cone in the movie that.
it's a… it's a charming little…
little object.
and we looked at it over and over
for months at different intervals.
and we would look at other things
through the lens of
like how did we make this pine cone?
We like this look.
If you know how the lines of
a simple. organic pine cone works.
you start to learn the line language
and the level of detail
and the level of reality
that we're trying to infuse
into this movie.
You just kind of get a feel for
what this world looks like.
The Death puppet left room
for certain aspects to be explored.
Yeah. 'Cause I mean. I think originally
the Death. we had the snake tail.
and it was you and Toby
saw that scaling as a pine cone texture.
And that was so brilliant.
It was a great way of tying it into
the pine cone that Death represented
every living thing.
There were some pants
for Spazzatura.
And the line in the pants…
-Had to be handmade.
-It had to be handmade.
But it didn't wanna be overt. you know.
It wanted to feel real in a sense.
but it sort of reflected
into everything else.
this notion of it's not perfect.
It's got a character to it.
We'd all seen the sample.
It had come from Mackinnon and Saunders.
They gave us a swatch board. If we
can handle these stripes nine ways.
Here's ones that we like.
and we were all. "That one."
And we laughed.
We're like. "We all agree."
"That's so great. It must be that one."
Then the next step was
to talk about well. why?
Because if you talk about why.
then maybe those rules
can inform other things.
There are rules. you see.
We had to find
the language of it.
how cartoony is it. how real is it.
And there was sort of a sweet spot
I think we landed in.
Having a magical element like Pinocchio
required that we had
a more grounded world around Pinocchio.
If everything is magical.
nothing is magical.
We needed to ground the world.
Proportions needed to be correct.
The physics needed to be correct.
It provided stakes for the emotional story
and arc of Pinocchio.
Guillermo has a very good eye for that.
He notices when something
is not going to fit into the world.
This is no different
than designing
and decorating a full-size.
live-action movie set.
That's the beauty
of stop-motion animation.
Set dec. set design. decoration.
cinematography. they're completely
like a live-action film.
Guillermo's very concerned that
things feel and look real.
And so we do reference a lot of
period images if we can find them.
For example. this interior.
If you imagined that
the main source of energy was coal
and wood.
we stained all the walls with coal stains.
So you have to really run it
not by a design machine.
but as a reality machine.
I remember
one of his first visits.
He was looking at the church set
that we had just sort of barely
gotten together by the time he got here.
and he was like. "Yes. We should
age the hell out of this."
We started with the fact that
churches took decades. if not centuries
to be completed.
So. the woodwork would be a little lighter
than the frescoes on the walls.
or the stained-glass windows would be
of a different decade or a century.
and the carving of the Christ
took a while.
It needed to feel like the same handiwork
of all the other stuff
in Geppetto's household.
You needed to feel the shaving
of the wood. the shape.
which I wanted to have a parallel
with Pinocchio being carved of wood
and Pinocchio has a hard time figuring out
why the townspeople hate him
if he's made of wood and they love Him.
as he says. who is also made of wood.
So. that point could only be done
at the church.
My only worry on this movie was
will I have enough motion control kit
to do all the camera movement
that Guillermo will expect on this movie.
Because the later Guillermo films.
the camera just doesn't stop.
We wanted to stage
with the characters
moving around on the camera.
moving around the way you would stage
with actors on a set.
In some instances.
we move the camera quite a bit.
For example. one single shot
took three months.
There's a shot where
Spazzatura is headed back to the carnival
where he sort of runs down.
and the camera follows him
traversing the carnival grounds
and ending up in Volpe's wagon.
A shot like that.
it tells you so much
'cause you really see
the way that Spazzatura moves.
It tells you something
about his character.
It also tells you about
the environment that he's from.
It tells you about the circus.
And we also get to meet
some of the other characters
who are in the background
as he sort of passes through.
A lot of Guillermo's movies
are hyperreality.
So. you use the light
just to accent
the emotional content of a scene.
so having some cloud movement
is such an assist for telling the story.
Like with Geppetto
when he is chopping down the tree.
It helps to reflect
Geppetto's agonized state.
so we can really amp up the drama.
One of the things
which we had not done before
was when Volpe is
burning Pinocchio on the fire.
We were able to have a torch
with LED lights inside the torch.
so that as Volpe moves the torch around.
we were able to have
a separate pass for that light
and to give it multiple exposures.
Give me that torch. Spazzatura.
Because normally.
you'd always have to fake that up
with moving lights or stage.
and this was an opportunity for us
to really control that
in the post process.
We could keep the moonlight separate
and just have all of that
torch light and fire light
on separate passes.
You will burn. Burn bright!
Like a star!
-Ow! Help!
It's amazing how the character
designs and the actors themselves
inform each other.
and then the actual animator
informs it as well.
By the time that
the animator gets the puppet.
the animator has the voice tracks.
The thing with Pinocchio
that I love
is the idea of it embodying
any four-year-old. six-year-old
that are balls of energy
-that nobody can control.
-Oh!
When they're sad.
you understand they're sad.
and they can be
on the verge of tears one second
and incredibly happy two seconds later.
As we came to find out with Gregory.
you have a very short lifespan
in the recording sessions.
but it was all true.
My process at the beginning.
I was very nervous.
I've never done
anything where I was a really big.
substantial part in the movie.
It was like shooting a documentary.
Whenever he started acting.
we did a little thing that…
…it was very easy for him
to shake out the acting.
I said… I would say
he would call me a dummy.
He said that
if I said "dummy" at the end of a line.
even though we wouldn't
probably put it in the final cut.
it made me put
a lot more emphasis into it.
especially on some of the funnier lines.
And every time he got a little too actory.
he would say. "Shut up. dummy!"
And then he would laugh it out.
and he would continue.
I'm made of flesh and bone and meaty bits.
I'm a real boy.
He's really good at being natural.
but he is incredibly intimate
when he's whispering
or talking to the cricket
or talking to Candlewick.
There is an absolute pure emotion there.
Fathers feel despair. like everyone else.
And they say things
they only think they mean in the moment.
But inside they love you.
Well. I think this is
my third project with David Bradley.
and it's because I admire him very much.
I think he's an actor that has
an easily identifiable sound.
No one talks to the Podestà like that.
I approached the script by finding
some kind of vocal quality
that was believable and truthful.
but something that tells
the story and it's more vivid
and more capturing
the essence of this character.
He goes high. and he goes low really fast.
"Why are you saying that?"
You know. he really is…
It's almost like a musical thing he has.
A son knows when his father is alive.
He will look for us. You'll see.
You have nothing to worry about.
Easy for you to say.
I wasn't convinced of Cricket
when we started the film.
Just as a character.
As soon as Ewan started voicing it.
I was like. "Okay. I'm on board."
We… We made it!
I can't believe it!
I'm a massive fan
of Ewan McGregor.
and when he talks.
he's so relatable but warm.
And I said.
"We cannot have enough of this voice."
Well. I've tried my best.
and that's the best anyone can do.
Pinocchio taught me that.
And I thought that should be
the main character of the film.
the narrator character.
And we rewrote the scenes
emphasizing the cricket
even if he was just watching.
I think the sessions with Ewan have been
the best character voice sessions
I've ever had in my life.
I am Count Volpe. You have been chosen!
Come partake in the fun.
fanciful. carefree carnival life
as the star of my puppet show.
We knew that Volpe needed to be
glitzy. cosmopolitan. appealing.
sound like a man of the world.
We wanted him to have an accent.
but have a voice
that could pronounce flawlessly
a word in French.
a word in Italian. a word in German.
Puppets are le meilleur qui soit.
The tops!
Lift your arm.
Puppets are well respected
in every station of life.
The only voice that came to mind
was Christoph Waltz.
Talk about a guy that can change
the rhythm and the intention of a sound
in mid-phrase.
That's a dramatic function.
so to say.
And I always look for
the function in the story.
He really knows how to vary things
and then just punch at the right moment.
-What are you doing here?
The voice of Spazzatura.
which will come as a big surprise.
was almost a blessing and an accident
that I could not foresee.
We were shooting Nightmare Alley.
Cate Blanchett and I
were having such a good time
that she said.
"You gotta give me a part on Pinocchio."
I go. "The only part left is a monkey."
And…
And I went. "I would do anything."
"I would play a pencil
in a movie for you."
And I showed her the design
for Spazzatura. and she said.
"I think this is my spirit animal."
When Spazzatura gets shot out of the sky.
do you want a little .
Like in the distance.
I think there's something of
Guillermo's laugh…
…that's in Spazzatura.
But I think all the characters
in Guillermo's movies.
all of us feel that they're in the eye of
Guillermo as the beholder.
So. I think there's probably
qualities of Guillermo
in all of the characters.
And Spazzatura is. yeah. case in point.
Normally. when you're watching
a piece of animation
which has music in it.
you can feel the songs coming up.
It's almost like the dialogue is
a ramp for the music.
Whereas the songs spring out
of Guillermo's Pinocchio
completely by surprise.
Meh.
These puppets gave me the desire of not
doing an animation movie.
but doing like a real live-action film.
It's the same for me
'cause they look alive.
They all look like real people.
So. I tried the music to be playing
like it was a real person's.
We like to describe this
not necessarily as a musical.
It's a film with musical moments.
They're not traditional musical songs.
they're not pop songs.
They're just sort of
what you would think of. if you think
of Alexandre and Guillermo and Mark.
All those genius minds together
is something totally unique.
When Alexandre and I were talking.
I thought it would be interesting
to start the movie
with characters that sing
but end up…
The second half of the movie has
fascist-era songs and marches.
This movie was a very long process
because. of course.
the animation takes a lot of time.
but also because
Guillermo wanted me to write songs
for the characters.
and a song has this capacity
in a few seconds
to explain the life of a character.
They give the tone musically.
Also. they give information about
who they are. where they are.
where they come from.
and where they're going.
I admire Alexandre Desplat.
He is a consummate movie composer.
He does the same thing
that I do with parts.
He looks at the story.
For the whole film.
I've chosen to use only wood instruments.
So. you have the guitars. the mandolin.
the piano. the harp.
and all the woodwinds.
The bassoons. the clarinets.
the oboes. the flutes.
All these instruments are in wood
which creates a very strange environment
that belongs to Pinocchio.
No!
This movie. you could watch
in a double program
with Pan's and Devil's Backbone easily.
It has a lot of elements
with a pure soul being tested
and coming out on the other side strong.
As I see it.
you were charged with a burden.
This is a film about death.
You don't have a film about life
if you don't have a film about death.
Very well then.
When we started to tackle
this Pinocchio.
I knew I wanted to do my own version.
I didn't want to address
just an adaptation.
I wanted to talk about things that
touched me personally very deeply.
Most of my movies. one way or another.
deal with me and my father.
and this is not an exception.
You watch this boy grow up.
never physically changing.
But yet.
the realization that he can do far more
than anyone else around him.
Now. make the most of it.
Normally. Pinocchio is about
what Pinocchio learns in the world
and then becomes a good boy
and therefore becomes a real boy.
and our Pinocchio is not that.
He changes everyone because he is so pure.
He changes Geppetto.
He changes the cricket.
He changes Spazzatura.
He changes everyone.
And he learns who he is as a human being.
I think the film exceeded
everything I wanted.
It's a movie
I would've loved to have as a kid.
It's a movie I'd love to have as an adult.
It's a movie I would love to have
to discuss with the family.
and the possibility of seeing it
on command
after experiencing it for the first time.
it's something that creates
an intimate bond
between the viewer and the film.
It certainly grows for me
with every viewing.
and I hope it does that with the audience.